---
title: "Two Interesting, Short Probability Questions"
date: 2019-02-28T18:50:10-06:00
draft: false
---

1. If you have `$N$` coins, and `$x$` of them are special in the sense that they have head both front and back. And you pick one up randomly and flip it `$k$` times and get 10 heads, what is the probability that the coin you picked is one of the special ones?

    _Solution:_ Say `$A$` is the event that you get 10 heads, `$B$` is the event you picked one of the special coins. Then, by Law of Total Probability,

    <div>$$P(A) = P(A|B)\cdot P(B) + P(A|B^{C})\cdot P(B^{C}) = 1\cdot\frac{x}{N} + \big(\frac{1}{2}\big)^{k}\cdot\frac{N-x}{N}$$</div>

    Now, from the Bayes Theorem,

    <div>$$P(B | A) = \frac{P(A, B)}{P(A)} = \frac{\cfrac{1}{N}}{1\cdot\cfrac{x}{N} + \big(\cfrac{1}{2}\big)^{k}\cdot\cfrac{N-x}{N}}=\frac{1}{x + \cfrac{N-1}{2^k}}$$</div>

    Say for `$N = 100$`, `$x = 10$`, and `$k = 2$`, the probability will be about `$2.9\%$`.


2. Say you have `$N$` ropes, or lines, or spaghetti. Each time you pick two ends and tie them up together. What is the expected number of loops?

    _Solution_: This one is for bored people. So for each round, after you picked up two ends and connect them, they either form a circle, or they do not. In either case the total number of ropes available decreases by `$1$`. Say in a round we have `$i$` ropes left, then let `$R_i$` be a Bernoulli r.v. denoting if  a loop is formed, by Law of Total Probability, 

    <div>$$\mathbb{E}(R_i) = \sum_{j} P(\mbox{picked up rope }j) \cdot P(\mbox{forming a loop})= \sum_{j=1}^{2i} \frac{1}{2i}\cdot\frac{1}{2i - 1} = \frac{1}{2i-1}$$</div>

    Summing over all `$N$` rounds, and let `$R$` be the r.v. of total number of loops formed.

    <div>$$\mathbb{E}(R) = \mathbb{E}\Big(\sum_{i} R_i\Big)=\sum_i \mathbb{E}(R_i) = \sum_{i=1}^{N}\frac{1}{2i-1}$$</div>

    Second step is true since expectation is a linear operator.

    So for `$N=100$`, this is about

    ```python
    py> expected_n_of_loops = lambda N: sum(1.0/(2*i - 1) for i in range(1,N))
    py> expected_n_of_loops(100)
    # 3.2793170636734916
    ```
    Note the generator expression, without of a list or a tuple, in the `sum` function. 
