---
title: "My Git Cookbook"
date: 2017-09-20T10:58:14-05:00
draft: false
---

I _cook_ a lot (real cooking). However I find myself not sampling from my full pool of available recipes - only those I tried recently are considered. Good recipes will eventually lost to time. To manually set up a recipe pool with larger capacity, recipes are documented into _cookbooks_.

The cookbook is subject to continuous amendment as me the stat-person is marching through the foreign land of software develepment.

Long, long time ago, in a land far, far away, there was a stat-person...... Anyways, let's save the tale for another time.

# Basics

## The simplest workflow

1-2-3-4's are the best for lazy peeps, but they are also more prone to misunderstanding. So warning: **Only read on if you know what each is about**.

1. `git clone` some repo to a local place.
2. (optional, but recommended) `git checkout -b <new branch name>`
3. Make changes.
4. `git add -u` to add changes made to pre-existing files. Then `git add <new files>`.
5. `git commit -m <your lovely commit message>`.
6. `git push -u origin <the branch at origin you want to push to>`.

And, _voila_, your changes are under the sunlight.

## Set up SSH for Github
You want to do this because you want SSH without entering your password everytime. 
```
ssh-keygen -b <at least 2048> -t <your favorite crtypo algorithm>
```
You will find a `id_rsa.pub` in `.ssh` file in your home directory. Will ya just copy the content to github on "Settings - SSH and GPG keys - New SSH key"?

### Share Your Shell Without Sharing Your Password
**Story:** The professor decided (very kindly) to let students use his research desktop for the computational complex homework. The TA came in and ask students to run some weird scripts and send a `id_rsa.pub` to him by email so that they could access the desktop. Here is how he do it.

Simply add the content of `id_rsa.pub` to `~/.ssh/authorized_keys`.

## Download a git repo
Git personnel say _clone_ when they mean _download_ to enhance their geekiness. 
```
git clone <repo>
```
Please note that this will be only your copy of the original repo. You are free to mess with it, but the repo up there online will not change unless you tell git to do so.

**Story:** A colleague asks another, "my git clone is not working at all, please help." The other colleague tried in command line found nothing wrong with the repo. "What are you doing exactly?" "I clicked on clone..." "So you are using S*****Tree? Try restarting." Lessons learned. Command line champs.

## Take a look at your git tree

Think of git as tree: you have a trunk (_master_ branch), and _branches_ coming out of the trunk at some point. Git people generally want to make changes to their codes on a _branch_ of the tree, and _merge_ them back to _master_. This avoids the ugly story of you find your changes being buggy and cannot return to the glorious past. 

So, what are the branches in this repo?
```
git branch -a
```
Green is the branch you are in; reds are the branches in the repo online but not in your local repo; whites are branches in your local repo.

You can go to white branches by
```
git checkout <your branch>
```

You can create a local branch tracking some branches in the online repo
```
git branch <name of your new branch>
git branch -u <origin/tracking branch> <name of your new branch>
git checkout <name of your new branch>
git pull
```

## Add your changes to the _stage_
Now you have done your job as a dev. You are eager to put them under the limelight. Git people called this staging.
```
git add <path to the file you have changed>
```
Want to add all changes at once? This only applies to the case where the files you changed exist previously in the repo. If you added new files to the repo, you need to `git add`.
```
git add -u
```
You are also able to remove files on the stage
```
git rm <path to the file you want to remove>
```

So what's on the stage?
```
git status
```
Greens are what you have on the stage. Reds are the ones you want to keep to yourself. These may be temporary files generated by your program while running. If you want them in the repo, just `git add`.

You can `git add` multiple times in the dev process before you `git commit` them.

Want to discard everthing on the stage? Just
```
git reset
```

## Commit your changes when you are done with everthing

You are still _not_ committed changes to your repo. By committing, you will be leaving a mark on this branch's _history_. People will be able to see what did you do in your commit. It is like a milestone for your dev efforts. To commit
```
git commit -m <your lovely commit message>
```
Don't make too many commits for some small feature in your code. This will make your repo _history_ looks messy. Already have too much commits? No worries, take a look at the interactive rebase section below.

There are many good docs on how to write a good commit message. Ok tl;dr people, your message should at least be concise and clear catching the main changes in the commit. 

A good practice is to add a small paragraph to your commit message. You can either create a file with the first line being your message and the third line your paragraph, and use
```
git commit -F <your file>
```

Or, you can simply press enter while not closing your quotation marks with `-m`.

## Push your local changes to origin

Now you have several commits ready that you want to push to your online repo. To do this
```
git push -u origin <the branch you want to push to>
```
By adding `-u`, you are telling git that this remote branch is the mirror of your local branch. When you `git pull` (see later), your local branch will be pulling from this remote branch. 

## Download changes in the online repo

When your branch is outdated, generally you want a 
```
git pull
```
to sync up. It is equivalent to `git fetch` and then `git merge`， the former will add in what happened at the online repo while you are doing your work, but leaving your work untouched, the latter will merge the two lines of development. When nothing happens in your local branch but there is a lot happened online, do a `git pull`, otherwise do it separately.

## Resolve conflicts

When you want to merge two branches both originating from some common ancestor, do a 
```
git merge <the other branch>
```
while you are in another. However sometimes the branches each will have a word on the same part of the code. When git can't decide who to listen to, it gives you
```
<<<<<<< branch A
Try to see it my way, do I have to keep on talking till I can't go on?
=======
While you see it your way, run the risk of knowing that our love may soon be gone.
>>>>>>> branch B
```
in the conflicting file. Simply delete these extra marks and leaving the file the way you want it to be when you save and exit.

## Rebasing

Rebase in its simplest terms means moving your branch to a new place such that it looks like you started to work from elsewhere. There are many good tutorials available online. To rebase your working branch to master, for example, with your working branch, do

```
git rebase master
```
If this branch is tracking some remote branch, you will have to delete the reference before pushing your rebase to the origin (`git push -d <origin_name> <branch_name>`).

## Other simple operations

### Rename a branch
Simply `git branch -m <old_name> <new_name>`.

### Delete a branch
*Locally:*
`git branch -d <branch_name>`

*Remotely:*
`git push -d <origin_name> <branch_name>`

# Advanced

Now you are in the advanced land. People will assume you are a responsible adult being able to suck it up when you lose it. Well, not yet? Make a copy of your local git repo before you take adventures.

## Interactive rebasing

This is really the number one tool a git user should know after knowing all the basics. It feels like the git analog of `awk` or `sed` of bash. Examples of its usages: 

* Combine several commits into one.
* Change a previous commit's message.
* Change a previous commit's content.
* Retroactively check which commits fail a certain task.

I usually prefer to use
```
git rebase -i <last commit you want to retain>
```
to invoke interactive rebasing. I feel it is the most intuitive among other choices. `<last commit you want to retain>` is the first few (until unique) digits of the hex key of the commit. After command you will see a text document pops out listing the commits since the one you want to retain. It is quite self-explanatory. Just read the comment section for more information.

After you are done, save it and close it. Git will process your request from the very top line. If stopped instructions will be given. Nothing differs far from basic git commands.

`exec` is a little bit confusing. This one needs you to insert lines between the commits. For example, I can insert `x date` between commits and in the process of rebasing git will tell me the time when it reaches that point. 

## Fixing a pushed change

First of all this is unrecommended unless you know what you are doing exactly. By design users are not supposed change contents that they have already pushed to the repository. However exceptions do exist. If you think you are in one of these exceptions, read on.

It's simple, if you already have a local branch tracking the remote branch which contains commits you want to change, then rebase `squash` or `fixup` locally and commit. If not, you will need to either force push by `git push -f <your_origin> <repo_at_origin>` or delete the branch `git push -d <your_origin> <repo_at_origin>` and add again `git push -u <your_origin> <repo_at_origin>`. In either case do make sure no one else is working on the branch. 

## Branches and tags

## Configure git commands

## Git modules

## Moving your branch to another node